Capture HTTP request/response headers as span attributes (#1898)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md

It is recommended to also use the general [network attributes][], especially `net.peer.ip`. If `net.transport` is not specified, it can be assumed to be `IP.TCP` except if `http.flavor` is `QUIC`, in which case `IP.UDP` is assumed.

### HTTP request and response headers

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|

> | `http.request.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP request headers, `<key>` being the HTTP Header name (case preserving), the value being the header values. [1] [2] | `http.request.header.Content-Type=["application/json"]`; `http.request.header.X-Forwarded-for=["1.2.3.4", "1.2.3.5"]` | No |

Reviewer: We have quite a few HTTP semantic conventions that will usually (but not necessarily) be just copies of respective headers, namely `http.host`, `http.user_agent`. What is the guidance on these? I would propose to prefer the specific semantic convention for now and not duplicate them with this by default.

Reviewer 2: Since users will have to explicitly mention all headers they want to capture, I think it is unlikely they'll specify headers that their SDK already captures. Can we leave it out to simplify a bit?

> | `http.request.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP request headers, `<key>` being the HTTP Header name (case preserving), the value being the header values. [1] [2] | `http.request.header.Content-Type=["application/json"]`; `http.request.header.X-Forwarded-for=["1.2.3.4", "1.2.3.5"]` | No |

Reviewer: I think it is important to provide guidance which headers should be captured by default. Capturing all headers will certainly be too much. I propose that instrumentations need to have captured headers explicitly configured. We should even have an standardized configuration (envvar) for this. The details are outside of scope of this PR probably, but in this PR I think it is important to at least state that capturing everything by default is wrong.

Author: I imagined that a user would have to configure an allowlist of headers that are to be included as span attributes, capturing all headers is definitely not a good idea from the security perspective.

| `http.response.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP response headers, `<key>` being the HTTP Header name (case preserving), the value being the header values. [1] | `http.response.header.Content-Type=["application/json"]`; `http.response.header.My-custom-header=["abc", "def"]` | No |

**[1]:** Certain headers MAY be sanitized or omitted to avoid leaking sensitive information.

> **[2]:** The attribute value MAY contain separate header value as separate items, or concatenated header values as one item, depending on the way the HTTP library provides access to headers.

Reviewer 3: is this footnote actually referenced anywhere?

Author: Oops🤭 
Thanks for catching this!

It is recommended to also use the general [network attributes][], especially `net.peer.ip`. If `net.transport` is not specified, it can be assumed to be `IP.TCP` except if `http.flavor` is `QUIC`, in which case `IP.UDP` is assumed.

### HTTP request and response headers

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.request.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP request headers, `<key>` being the HTTP Header name (case preserving), the value being the header values. [1] [2] | `http.request.header.Content-Type=["application/json"]`; `http.request.header.X-Forwarded-for=["1.2.3.4", "1.2.3.5"]` | No |
| `http.response.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP response headers, `<key>` being the HTTP Header name (case preserving), the value being the header values. [1] [2] | `http.response.header.Content-Type=["application/json"]`; `http.response.header.My-custom-header=["abc", "def"]` | No |

> **[1]:** Instrumentations SHOULD require an explicit configuration of which headers are to be captured.

Reviewer 2: Should we specify the env vars that should be used to configure this?

Author: I don't think that we have any instrumentation config prop/env var spec in this repo - I agree that this needs to be done, but as a separate effort and not a part of this PR.

> **[1]:** Instrumentations SHOULD require an explicit configuration of which headers are to be captured (e.g. an allowlist).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[1]:** Instrumentations SHOULD require an explicit configuration of which headers are to be captured (e.g. a capturelist).
```

Or remove the sample. I think "allowlist" does not fit here (allowlist cannot replace all usages of the old term).

Reviewer 4: Also, any reason to not use MUST here? I think this is sensitive enough that should be explicit all the time.

Author: I used the `db.statement` attribute as an analogy: the DB query can contain very sensitive information too but the spec says that `The value may be sanitized to exclude sensitive information` and doesn't place any hard requirements on instrumentations to make sanitization required (or even configurable).

Including all request/response headers can be a security risk - explicit configuration helps avoid leaking sensitive information.

Some HTTP headers - `Host` and `User-Agent` - are already captured in the `http.host` and `http.user_agent` attributes.

> These headers SHOULD NOT be captured as a part of this convention.

Reviewer 2: Can we remove this to simplify implementation a bit? Users will most likely not configure this feature to capture headers that are already part of the spec and supported by their SDK.

Reviewer: I'd see this as a suggestion for the user how to use the configuration. An explicit request by the user is a valid reason not to honor the SHOULD.

Reviewer 2: I'm concerned SDK authors might not read it like that. Your comment is very clear. Perhaps we can re-word it to sound more like that?

Author: Done 👍

It is recommended to also use the general [network attributes][], especially `net.peer.ip`. If `net.transport` is not specified, it can be assumed to be `IP.TCP` except if `http.flavor` is `QUIC`, in which case `IP.UDP` is assumed.

> ### HTTP request and response headers

Reviewer 5: Changelog please 🙂

Author: Done 👍

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.request.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP request headers, `<key>` being the normalized HTTP Header name (lowercase, with `-` characters replaced by `_`), the value being the header values. [1] [2] | `http.request.header.content_type=["application/json"]`; `http.request.header.x_forwarded_for=["1.2.3.4", "1.2.3.5"]` | No |

> | `http.response.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP response headers, `<key>` being the normalized HTTP Header name (lowercase, with `-` characters replaced by `_`), the value being the header values. [1] [2] | `http.response.header.content_type=["application/json"]`; `http.response.header.my_custom_header=["abc", "def"]` | No |

Reviewer 6: Why not have this as attributes with "type" `map[string][]string` (too much golang)? Then the key would be fixed.

Reviewer 7: I had the same suggestion on the ticket itself https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1061#issuecomment-908447921. I think nested map is a much cleaner approach than inventing bespoke translation rules and polluting the overall attributes namespace.

Author: So what should we do with this PR then? Should we wait with it until we reach a consensus on #376 and implement headers as nested structures?

Reviewer 8: If we accept this PR, will it possible later to define `http.request.headers` attribute to contain a map of headers? I assume "yes", so we can proceed and merge this PR for now. Although @bogdandrutu may object to having two separate semantic conventions to represent the same entity :)

Author: > If we accept this PR, will it possible later to define `http.request.headers` attribute to contain a map of headers?

It will - although having 2 conventions that basically do the same thing will be far from elegant.
I also had some question in #376, maybe answering them will make the whole picture a bit clearer.

**[1]:** Instrumentations SHOULD require an explicit configuration of which headers are to be captured.
Including all request/response headers can be a security risk - explicit configuration helps avoid leaking sensitive information.

Some HTTP headers - `Host` and `User-Agent` - are already captured in the `http.host` and `http.user_agent` attributes.
Users MAY explicitly configure instrumentations to capture them even though it is not recommended.

> **[2]:** The attribute value MAY contain separate header value as separate items, or concatenated header values as one item, depending on the way the HTTP library provides access to headers.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
**[2]:** The attribute value MAY contain multiple header values as an array of strings, or as a single, possibly comma-concatenated, string, depending on the way the HTTP library provides access to headers.
```

Reviewer: @yurishkuro, no the current wording is right: We want to always have an array, even if it has just a single element.

Reviewer: See #831

Reviewer 7: Ok, but it doesn't mention array and the wording is confusing. Not a blocker.

Reviewer: The array is in the type column (note the `[]`).

Author: I've changed the wording so that it's somewhat in between those two versions, but strongly saying that it should be an array.

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.request.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP request headers, `<key>` being the normalized HTTP Header name (lowercase, with `-` characters replaced by `_`), the value being the header values. [1] [2] | `http.request.header.content_type=["application/json"]`; `http.request.header.x_forwarded_for=["1.2.3.4", "1.2.3.5"]` | No |
| `http.response.header.<key>` | string[] | HTTP response headers, `<key>` being the normalized HTTP Header name (lowercase, with `-` characters replaced by `_`), the value being the header values. [1] [2] | `http.response.header.content_type=["application/json"]`; `http.response.header.my_custom_header=["abc", "def"]` | No |

**[1]:** Instrumentations SHOULD require an explicit configuration of which headers are to be captured.
Including all request/response headers can be a security risk - explicit configuration helps avoid leaking sensitive information.

Some HTTP headers - `Host` and `User-Agent` - are already captured in the `http.host` and `http.user_agent` attributes.
Users MAY explicitly configure instrumentations to capture them even though it is not recommended.

> **[2]:** The attribute value MAY contain multiple header values as an array of strings, or as a single-item array containing a possibly comma-concatenated string, depending on the way the HTTP library provides access to headers.

Reviewer: Actually, the wording is a bit odd here with the "MAY". If we opt to not use the "MAY", what else can we set? Nothing, right? So instead of "MAY ... or ...", I suggest "MUST either ... or ...".
